chore(blog): the reference rabbit hole (#461)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/the-reference-rabbit-hole.md

---
title: "The Reference Rabbit Hole"
date: 2021-11-15T12:00:00+01:00
type: Engineering
tags:
  - Specification
  - JSON Schema 
cover: /img/posts/the-reference-rabbit-hole.webp
authors:
  - name: Jonas Lagoni
    photo: /img/avatars/jonaslagoni.webp
    link: https://github.com/jonaslagoni
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer
---

> So [Sergio](https://github.com/smoya) and I, went down a little bit of a rabbit hole the last couple of days when we were discussing [Fran's proposal to solve publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618), and I thought I would share the journey.

Reviewer: Don't tell me why but it sounds better to me. Obviously, you can skip it because my proficiency in English is meh...

```suggestion
So [Sergio](https://github.com/smoya) and I, went a little bit down a rabbit hole. the last couple of days when we were discussing [Fran's proposal to solve publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618), and I thought I would share the journey.
```

Author: Hmmmm 🤔 How about:

```suggestion
So [Sergio](https://github.com/smoya) and I went a little bit down a rabbit hole the last couple of days when we were discussing [Fran's proposal to solve publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618), and I thought I would share the journey.
```

Reviewer: I think it is also good for reading 👍

## What is a reference?

> Just to start with the basics, a reference is something in AsyncAPI we use to allow for reusability, so we don't need to define things twice. In AsyncAPI we refer to this as the [Reference Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#referenceObject). The reference can either be local within the same document, external in another file or remotely.

Reviewer: I would just add a short explanation of how references work. Just something like "you define once, and then you kind of "include" that definition wherever you want".
In that way, the reader will have a clear idea of what we talk about without having to check the link.

Author: Makes sense 👍

## The Trigger

> During the discussion, Sergio brought up that Fran was actually using an illegal reference, as he, in one of the examples, using a Reference Object for a server, which was not allowed.  More specifically, it was this example where he references the `mosquitto` server:

Reviewer: Some suggestions that IMHO simplify the sentence. Feel free to take it or discard it 👍 

```suggestion
During the discussion, Sergio brought up that Fran was actually using an illegal reference. In one of the examples, it used a Reference Object for a server, which is not allowed. More specifically, it was this example where he references the `mosquitto` server:
```

```yaml
asyncapi: 3.0.0
...
servers:
  mosquitto:
    $ref: 'common.asyncapi.yaml#/components/servers/mosquitto'
```

Immediately I said, "wait .... It's not?!". Cause before this, I had always used `$ref` quite extensively in my AsyncAPI documents and specifically used a reference for servers. And I knew that the tooling had no problems with the `$ref` as long as it was a valid reference. 

> But Sergio was absolutely right, a second look into the specification, `servers` are defined using [Servers Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serversObject), which are defined using a map of [Server Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serverObject)s. **NOT** `Server Object | Reference Object` as I expected.

Reviewer: Some suggestions that IMHO simplify the sentence. Feel free to take it or discard it 👍

```suggestion
But Sergio was absolutely right. By taking a second look into the specification, I noticed `servers` are defined using [Servers Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serversObject), which are basically a map of [Server Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serverObject)s. **NOT** `Server Object | Reference Object` as I expected.
```

Author: I don't think this change is needed :)

So after that, we started to realize, that there is quite a big difference when and where Reference Objects are allowed. For the full list of discrepancies, check out [spec #650](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/650).

A quick side note, when I say tooling allowed it, I mean the [JS Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js), as most of our tooling directly depend upon this library to parse and interact with AsyncAPI documents. 

### But why did tooling allow it?!

So back to my own experience, why was I so sure that the tooling allowed for me to use Reference Objects for servers? 

> Well, as it turns out, it is because that the underlying parser, bundles references before it validates the AsyncAPI document. This means that if I defined my AsyncAPI document such as:

Reviewer: Does it make sense?

```suggestion
Well, as it turns out, it is because the underlying parser bundles references before it validates the AsyncAPI document. This means that if I defined my AsyncAPI document such as:
```

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
info:
  title: Test overriding dereferenced objects 
  version: '1.0.0'
servers:
  test-server:
    $ref: './servers/testServer.yaml'
...
```

Together with `testServer.yaml`:
```yaml
url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
protocol: ws
```

Validating the AsyncAPI document using the [JSON Schema representation for 2.2.0](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/blob/master/schemas/2.2.0.json), would reject it. 

However, because the parser bundles the reference together before doing so:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
info:
  title: Test overriding dereferenced objects 
  version: '1.0.0'
servers:
  test-server:
    url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
    protocol: ws
...
```

It is a fully valid AsyncAPI document once the parser tries to validate the document. Checkout [parser-js #405](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/405) for more information.

## Deep diving

> We started discussing the reference behavior, and we started to peruse the specification in terms of the Reference Object and the [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject).

Reviewer: > peruse

I'm sure this is gonna happen again https://www.reddit.com/r/SiliconValleyHBO/comments/e1m6ik/google_trends_for_peruse/ :trollface:

That was when we took notice, that depending on where you use the `$ref` keyword, it is subject to different behavior.

> This was something that, I especially, did not realize up until this point. In AsyncAPI Reference Object, is following [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), and for our Schema Object something different...

Reviewer: Maybe it's me again, trying to keep up so you can discard it:

```suggestion
This was something that, I especially, did not realize up until this point. AsyncAPI Reference Object is following [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), and for our Schema Object something different...
```

By default, `$ref` in the Schema Object, is inherited by [JSON Schema Draft 7](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01), described in [section 8](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8).

One of the key differences between our Reference Object, and how `$ref` is dereferenced in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that other schemas within itself need to resolve against. Meaning that it is allowed to do:

```yaml
asyncapi: "2.2.0"
...
channels:
  test/channel:
    publish:
      message:
        payload: 
          $id: "https://example.com/schemas/customer"
          type: "object"
          properties:
            address: 
              $ref: "/schemas/address"
components: 
  schemas:
    # Same dereference behavior
...
```

> This results in the dereferencing logic to look up the reference for the `address` property, at `https://example.com/schemas/address`, because it uses the Base URI in `$id` from the parent schema (`https://example.com`). I tried a little test in the [new Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/), which showed that this was not supported by the parser. See [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403) for more information.

Reviewer: nitpick

```suggestion
This results in the dereferencing logic to look up the reference for the `address` property at `https://example.com/schemas/address` because it uses the Base URI in `$id` from the parent schema (`https://example.com`). I tried a little test in the [new Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/), which showed that this was not supported by the parser. See [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403) for more information.
```

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
channels:
  light/measured:
    publish:
      summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
      operationId: onLightMeasured
      message:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/LightMeasured'
components:
  messages:
    LightMeasured: 
      name: LightMeasured
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/LightMeasurement'
  schemas:
    LightMeasurement:
      # Ignore the specifics here for now.
```
Here you can see that we simply reference where the definition of messages and payload schema is located.

# Schema Object references
As seen in the streetlight example, in AsyncAPI, to define your message payloads, we use use a [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject), which is a superset of [JSON Schema draft 7](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01). 

> What `superset` means is we follow the JSON Schema draft 7 specification, but with a few modifications and additions to keywords.

Reviewer: The reality is that we are wrongly saying we use a superset because for using a superset you first need to implement **all** elements of the set you extend. 

In this case, we know there are some things we do not support.
I know the word is in the current documentation, but I won't keep asserting Schema Object is a superset.
Maybe it's time to mention reality here?

Author: One thing is what tooling support, the other is what spec defines. The reality is that spec overwrites certain keywords, which then has a different meaning, like `$ref`. This technically renders `$id` unusable, but `$schema` should in theory still be supported as we define it as:

> The AsyncAPI Schema Object is a JSON Schema vocabulary which extends JSON Schema Core and Validation vocabularies. As such, any keyword available for those vocabularies is by definition available in AsyncAPI, and will work the exact same way, including but not limited to:

Reviewer: My point is that I have the feeling we are wrongly saying it is a superset. By its definition:

> A set which includes another set or sets.
>
> Source: https://www.lexico.com/definition/superset

It does say nothing about overriding or removing parts of the set, in fact I think this won't be ever expected. 😅

Reviewer 2: This comment thread is a nice rabbit 🐰 hole 🕳

But... Why did I think it was allowed to do so? 

## Discrepancies in AsyncAPI Tooling
So back to my own experience, why was I so sure that the tooling allowed for me to use **Reference Object**s for servers? 

Well, as it turns out, it is because the [JS parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js) dereferences before it validates the AsyncAPI document. This means that if I defined my AsyncAPI document such as:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
servers:
  test-server:
    $ref: './servers/testServer.yaml'
...
```

Together with `testServer.yaml`:
```yaml
url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
protocol: ws
```

Validating the AsyncAPI document using a tool such as [ajv](https://ajv.js.org/) against [JSON Schema representation for 2.2.0](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/blob/master/schemas/2.2.0.json), it would reject it. 

However, because the parser dereferences first, the document that is being validated is this:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
servers:
  test-server:
    url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
    protocol: ws
...
```

Checkout [parser-js #405](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/405) for more information.

## What about `$id` keyword

> The next thoughts that came to out minds was, one of the key differences between our **Reference Object**, and how `$ref` is resolved in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that is used as a base URI. This means that for example a message such as this:

Reviewer: I need to suggest you to remove the introductory part of this sentence. It is so long and couldn't follow it without reading 3 times.
```suggestion
One of the key differences between our **Reference Object**, and how `$ref` is resolved in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that is used as a base URI. This means that for example a message such as this:
```

Author: Makes it much more clear 👍

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
channels:
  test/channel:
    publish:
      message:
        schemaFormat: application/schema+json;version=draft-07
        payload: 
          $id: https://example.com/schemas/test
          type: object
          properties:
            address: 
              $ref: "/schemas/address"
...
```

This will result in the reference for the `address` property, to be looked up at `https://example.com/schemas/address`, because it uses the Base URI in `$id` from the parent schema (`https://example.com`). 

> I tried a little test in the [new Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/) (Studio uses the parser, so it could be used for an easy test), [which showed that this was not supported by the parser](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?base64=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). The library tries to resolve the reference at `https:///components/schemas/sentAt` when it should have tried to resolve it from `http://localhost.com/components/schemas/sentAt`. See [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403) for more information.

Reviewer: Why dont you use the same example as in 133:148 ?

Author: Good question, changing it.

## What about `$schema`?
In JSON Schema Draft 7, and in the **Schema Object**, there exist a keyword, similar to what `schemaFormat` is for the AsyncAPI Message Object, that can be used to define what version of JSON Schema `LightMeasurement` follows.

So what if both are defined at the same time?

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
components:
  messages:
    LightMeasured: 
      name: LightMeasured

>       schemaFormat: application/vnd.aai.asyncapi+yaml;version=2.2.0

Reviewer: I would add a comment here explaining what this line means.

Author: Done 👍

      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/LightMeasurement'
  schemas:
    LightMeasurement:
      $schema: 'http://json-schema.org/draft-04/schema#'
      ...
```
With such contradicting information, how should tooling handle this? This sparked [spec #655](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/655).

## What about extra keywords?

> Following that, by taking a closer look at the [JSON reference](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03) specification the **Reference Object** follows, we find the [sentence](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03#section-3):

Reviewer: By reading until here, the reader might think JSON Schema `$ref` behavior is what AsyncAPI spec follows. 
This is the first time you mention we don't, however, it is done very briefly. 
WOuld make sense to mention it earlier in the post? I think it's worth also to mention that it is completely different than what JSON Schema follows.

Author: Let's see what the others think about this one. 

sidenote, I kinda want to add this GIF 😆 

![billede](https://c.tenor.com/rEv3yEyvC_AAAAAC/james-franco-same.gif)

> Any members other than "$ref" in a JSON Reference object SHALL be ignored.

What this means, is that if we have a reference defined such as:

```yaml
...
components:
  messages:
    LightMeasured:
      payload:
        type: object
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/LightMeasurement'
```

> The `type` property for the message payload, should be completely ignored. So let's try and see what happens when we try this in [Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?base64=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).

Reviewer: I wouldn't force the user to go to the studio to see what happens. I recommend you to mention at least that the property `type` is wrongly being overridden or something like that.

Author: Good point, changed

> Firstly this is only allowed because we don't first validate the document. However, the underlying behavior still shows that the tooling did not follow the expected behavior, as they include the extra keywords anyway. More precisely, the referenced schema did not overwrite anything, as `type: object` was preserved. For more information see [parser-js #404](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/404).

Reviewer: > the referenced schema did not overwrite anything

Asking because I don't know: Is that the merge strategy or just the opposite? Like first bundling, then applying extra properties?

Author: Changed the entire sentence, do you mind checking if that answers your question?

Reviewer: Yeah now it is super clear! thanks!

Then what about JSON Schema, does this define a different behavior? The answer to this question can be found [here](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.3):

> All other properties in a "$ref" object MUST be ignored.

Luckily, they both match the same behavior in terms of extra keywords. Both Reference Object and JSON Schema should ignore extra keywords.

But, what if I use one of the newer JSON Schema versions, what then?

## Upgrading to JSON Schema draft 2020-12
We started to correlate the findings with the feature request from [Maciej](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu) about updating AsyncAPI Schema Object to point towards [JSON Schema Draft 2020-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-bhutton-json-schema-00).

What would this mean for our little `$ref` keywords?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> OpenAPI have in its most recent version 3.1, switched its default JSON Schema version to Draft 2020-12, the exact feature request for AsyncAPI. This, however, introduced a huge change to how you bundle references, I dont want to spend much time on this as [Ben](https://twitter.com/relequestual) and [Mike](https://twitter.com/PermittedSoc) described this entire change and what it means in terms of bundling in this great blog post: https://json-schema.org/blog/posts/bundling-json-schema-compound-documents#bundling-simple-external-resources. Besides this the release notes for Draft 2020-12 also offers some guidance which can be found here: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAPI have in its most recent version 3.1, switched its default JSON Schema version to Draft 2020-12, the exact feature request for AsyncAPI. This, however, introduced a huge change to how you bundle references. I don't want to spend much time on this as [Ben](https://twitter.com/relequestual) and [Mike](https://twitter.com/PermittedSoc) described this entire change and what it means in terms of bundling in this great blog post: https://json-schema.org/blog/posts/bundling-json-schema-compound-documents#bundling-simple-external-resources. Besides this the release notes for Draft 2020-12 also offers some guidance which can be found here: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes.html
```

> Besides having a bunch of new keywords that change the referencing behavior, such as `$dynamicRef`, `$dynamicAnchor`, `$anchor`. One of the key differences is that in [JSON Schema draft 2019-09](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-02), they changed their behavior of references where extra keywords are now allowed adjacent to `$ref`.

Reviewer: If you start with `Besides`, is because I expect you to mention the "in addition" part of the sentence immediately after.
```suggestion
Besides having a bunch of new keywords that change the referencing behavior, such as `$dynamicRef`, `$dynamicAnchor`, `$anchor`, pne of the key differences is that in [JSON Schema draft 2019-09](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-02), they changed their behavior of references where extra keywords are now allowed adjacent to `$ref`.
```

> But what does this mean exactly? Does this mean `$ref` overwrite any duplicate properties? or the other way around?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But what does this mean exactly? Does this mean `$ref` overwrites any duplicates properties? or the other way around?
```

Author: Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
But what does this mean exactly? Does this mean `$ref` overwrites any properties that appear twice? or the other way around?
```

Reviewer: LOL I introduced another typo in my suggestion. I think going with `duplicated` is more than enough. Sorry for the typo on the word 😆

Author: Haha, no worries, yea makes sense 👍

Well, there is one thing we need to remember about JSON Schema. It is primary build for validation rules and how a validator can take input data and determine whether that input is valid against the Schema. 

> This means, that if you have a JSON Schema using ref `$ref` such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means, that if you have a JSON Schema using `$ref` such as:
```

```json
{"format": "email", "minLength": 7, "maxLength": 12}
```

This behavior is different from what is assumed when using AsyncAPI, as the last option, is more aligned with expected behavior.

Furthermore, now, each schema can define it's own `$schema` that they follow, instead of ONLY being available at the root... 

This leaves the question, how can we make sure that we stay consistent and don't introduce more confusion into the AsyncAPI specification? This difference is what triggered the last issue in the [spec 649](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/649).

## Hard to find tooling
This leaves us with one huge deficit, that there are so many different behaviors for references that tooling mix and matches between the specifications and what they solve.

One of the most used tooling for dereferencing stuff in JS, and the one we are using is from [APIDevTools called json-schema-ref-parser](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser). We actually use this tool to ensure **ANY** encounters of `$ref` are dereferenced, so the tool has direct access to the schema, without it having to look elsewhere for it. 

> However, the tool starting out being build **ONLY** for dereferencing `$ref` based on the [JSON Reference specification and the JSON Pointer specification](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/22#issuecomment-231783185).  At least it was, now it's not easy to figure it out what it is for, as [it allows extra properties](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/232) but [$id is not taken into account](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/136).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the tool started out being built **ONLY** for dereferencing `$ref` based on the [JSON Reference specification and the JSON Pointer specification](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/22#issuecomment-231783185).  At least it was, now it's not easy to figure out what it is for, as [it allows extra properties](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/232) but [$id is not taken into account](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/136).
```

This leaves us in a big of a struggle, as [there are not many alternatives](https://json-schema.org/implementations.html#general-processing), for JS [@hyperjump/json-schema-core](https://github.com/jdesrosiers/json-schema-core) looks promising, but there are no tooling that our [Go parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-go) can use.

> And with no official or community tooling, we are left with having to develop it our selves to adopt the spec...

Reviewer: Would you like to mention https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/113 ?

Author: Yea sure, let's do that 👍

# Final word
That concludes the rabbit hole me and Sergio went down, for a simple `$ref` keyword... (ONE KEYWORD! :sweat_smile:)

> All I can add here, in the end, is a serious :pray: that we start switching the mindset from tooling for specification is something others build, to something we all have to build together. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All I can add here, in the end, is a serious :pray: that we start switching the mindset from tooling for specification others build, to something we all have to build together. 
```

Author: I find this suggestion hard to read 🧐 Don't you?

Reviewer: The original sentence does not have sense to me. At least that `is` before `something`.

Reviewer 2: Both the original sentence and Sergio's read awkwardly in English TBH, but no worries because I will fix it :) 

I might add my review as a separate commit in most likelihood if I find myself wanting to make too many editorial suggestions. Stay tuned :D

Author: Continue https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/461/files#r753587410

If you have any comments or issues with what was described here, please go into the respective issues and make a comment - also if you think we are wrong!

In case you are interested, we are also looking for contributors, to help us solve these issues. If you want to take one up, just write a comment in the respective issue.

Overview of issues:

> - [spec #650](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/650), highlight the discrepancies when the Reference Object can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [spec #650](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/650), highlights the discrepancies when the Reference Object can be used.
```

- [spec #649](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/649), tries to solve the core issue that `$ref` means two different things, depending on when it's used.
- [spec #655](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/655), what do you do when encountering `$schema` and Message Object `schemaFormat`, especially when they are contradicting.

> - [parser-js #405](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/405), highlight that the parser accurately validates incorrect AsyncAPI documents, because it bundles references before validating.
> - [parser-js #404](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/404), highlight that the parser allows for keywords to be defined together with `$ref` and are not being ignored.
> - [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403), highlight that the parser does not care about `$id` in the Schema Object when it should.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [parser-js #405](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/405), highlights that the parser accurately validates incorrect AsyncAPI documents, because it bundles references before validating.
- [parser-js #404](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/404), highlights that the parser allows for keywords to be defined together with `$ref` and are not being ignored.
- [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403), highlights that the parser does not care about `$id` in the Schema Object when it should.
```

---
title: "The Reference Rabbit Hole"
date: 2021-11-18T12:00:00+01:00
featured: true
type: Engineering
tags:
  - Specification
  - JSON Schema 
cover: /img/posts/the-reference-rabbit-hole.webp
authors:
  - name: Jonas Lagoni
    photo: /img/avatars/jonaslagoni.webp
    link: https://github.com/jonaslagoni
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer
---

> So [Sergio](https://github.com/smoya) and I, went down a little bit of a rabbit hole the last couple of days when we were discussing [Fran's proposal to solve publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618), and I thought I would share the journey.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Sergio](https://github.com/smoya) and I went down a bit of a rabbit hole the last couple of days while discussing [Fran's proposal to solve the publish/subscribe confusion](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/618); I thought I would share the journey. 
```

A lot of this can be seen as nitpicking... And I totally get this, as we need to venture deep into the specifications to fully understand the differences.

> I am gonna try to not use any complex words and explanations, so everyone can understand the problems, whether you are a novice AsyncAPI user or an experienced one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I'm going to try to not use any complex words and explanations so that everyone can understand the problems, whether you're a novice or an experienced AsyncAPI user. 
```

> So let's split up the understanding of what references is, and where they can be used, and what is down in this rabbit hole. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So let's split up the understanding of what references are, where references can be used, and what's down this rabbit hole. 
```

# AsyncAPI references

In AsyncAPI, we have something called a [Reference Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#referenceObject), which simply enables reusability in your AsyncAPI documents. This is possible through the simple keyword `$ref`. If we take a look at the [streetlight tutorial](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/streetlights), to utilize reusability, we could change [the document](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/streetlights#creating-the-asyncapi-file) to:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
channels:
  light/measured:
    publish:
      summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
      operationId: onLightMeasured
      message:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/LightMeasured'
components:
  messages:
    LightMeasured: 
      name: LightMeasured
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/LightMeasurement'
  schemas:
    LightMeasurement:
      # Ignore the specifics here for now.
```
Here you can see that we simply reference where the definition of messages and payload schema is located.

# Schema Object references

> As seen in the streetlight example, in AsyncAPI, to define your message payloads, we use use a [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject), which is a superset of [JSON Schema draft 7](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As seen in the streetlight example, to define your message payloads in AsyncAPI, we use a [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject), which is a superset of [JSON Schema draft 7](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01). 
```

What `superset` means is we follow the JSON Schema draft 7 specification, but with a few modifications and additions to keywords.

> The message `LightMeasured`, contains a keyword called `payload`, which is by default defined as **Schema Object**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The message `LightMeasured`, contains a keyword called `payload`, which is by default defined as a **Schema Object**. 
```

This is where the confusion starts, what behavior does the `$ref` keyword follow? More precisely, which specification?

> # The confusion creeping in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The confusion creeps in
```

> Let's try to take take a closer look at the [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject) to see if we can figure out the answer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take a closer look at the [Schema Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#schemaObject) to see if we can figure out the answer.
```

> Further information about the properties can be found in JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation. Unless stated otherwise, the property definitions follow the JSON Schema specification as referenced here.

> So what this means is that unless states otherwise in the **Schema Object**, it should follow the official JSON Schema draft 7 specification. So let's try to read further, to see if anything is stated about references. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So what this means is that unless stated otherwise in the **Schema Object**, it should follow the official JSON Schema draft 7 specification. So let's try to read further, to see if anything is stated about references. 
```

> Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a **Reference Object** can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions in place of defining them inline.

> Okay... So that must mean that if we ever encounter a reference we just follow the **Reference Object** description. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Okay... So that must mean that if we ever encounter a reference, we follow the **Reference Object** description. 
```

> Well, that was easy, I see no rabbit hole here Jonas!? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Well, that was easy; I see no rabbit hole here, Jonas!? 
```

# Welcome to the rabbit hole

> During the discussion, Sergio brought up that Fran was actually using an illegal reference, as he, in one of the examples, was using a **Reference Object** for a server, which was not allowed.  More specifically, it was this example where he references the `mosquitto` server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the discussion, Sergio brought up that Fran was using an illegal reference, as he, in one of the examples, was using a **Reference Object** for a server, which was not allowed.  More specifically, it was this example where he references the `mosquitto` server:
```

```yaml
...
servers:
  mosquitto:
    $ref: 'common.asyncapi.yaml#/components/servers/mosquitto'
```

> My immediate reaction was "wait .... It's not?!". 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
My immediate reaction was "wait... It's not?!"
```

I had always used `$ref` quite extensively in my AsyncAPI documents and specifically used a reference for servers. And I knew that the tooling had no problems with the `$ref` as long as it was a valid reference. 

> But Sergio was absolutely right, a second look into the specification, `servers` are defined using [Servers Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serversObject), which are defined using a map of [Server Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serverObject)s. **NOT** `Server Object | Reference Object` as I expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But Sergio was absolutely right; a second look at the specification showed that `servers` are defined using the [Servers Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serversObject), which is defined by using a map of [Server Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#serverObject)s. **NOT** `Server Object | Reference Object` as I expected.
```

> So after that, we started to realize, that there is quite a big difference when and where **Reference Object**s are allowed. For the full list of discrepancies, check out [spec #650](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/650).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that, we started to realize that there is quite a big difference between when and where **Reference Object**s are allowed. For the full list of discrepancies, check out [spec #650](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/650).
```

But... Why did I think it was allowed to do so? 

## Discrepancies in AsyncAPI Tooling
So back to my own experience, why was I so sure that the tooling allowed for me to use **Reference Object**s for servers? 

> Well, as it turns out, it is because the [JS parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js) dereferences before it validates the AsyncAPI document. This means that if I defined my AsyncAPI document such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Well, as it turns out, it's because the [JS parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js) dereferences before it validates the AsyncAPI document. This means that if I defined my AsyncAPI document as follows:
```

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
servers:
  test-server:
    $ref: './servers/testServer.yaml'
...
```

Together with `testServer.yaml`:
```yaml
url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
protocol: ws
```

> Validating the AsyncAPI document using a tool such as [ajv](https://ajv.js.org/) against [JSON Schema representation for 2.2.0](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/blob/master/schemas/2.2.0.json), it would reject it. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validating the AsyncAPI document using a tool such as [ajv](https://ajv.js.org/) against the [JSON Schema representation for 2.2.0](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas/blob/master/schemas/2.2.0.json), it would reject it. 
```

However, because the parser dereferences first, the document that is being validated is this:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
servers:
  test-server:
    url: ws://mycompany.com/ws
    protocol: ws
...
```

Checkout [parser-js #405](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/405) for more information.

## What about `$id` keyword

> One of the key differences between our **Reference Object**, and how `$ref` is resolved in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that is used as a base URI. This means that for example a message such as this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the key differences between our **Reference Object**, and how `$ref` is resolved in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that is used as a base URI. This means that a sample message such as this:
```

Author: Not sure why, but feel like `sample` over `example` is wrong 🤔 

```suggestion
One of the key differences between our **Reference Object**, and how `$ref` is resolved in JSON Schema Draft 7, is the [$id keyword](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.2). This allows you to define a URI that is used as a base URI. This means that an example message such as this:
```

Reviewer 2: Oh, it's not "wrong." Sometimes I suggest a diff word to give it variety. (You know, sometimes only using the same words can be a boring writing style.) But this is a blog post, so it should def maintain your voice and that should matter the most. :) 

I mostly was trying to fix the grammatical issue you originally had of `this means that for example...`. It sounds a little weird...

But your latest suggestion with the word `an` is def better :D

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.2.0'
...
channels:
  test/channel:
    publish:
      message:
        schemaFormat: application/schema+json;version=draft-07
        payload: 
          $id: https://example.com/schemas/test
          type: object
          properties:
            address: 
              $ref: "/schemas/address"
...
```

This will result in the reference for the `address` property, to be looked up at `https://example.com/schemas/address`, because it uses the Base URI in `$id` from the parent schema (`https://example.com`). 

> I tried a little test in the [new Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/) (Studio uses the parser, so it could be used for an easy test), [which showed that this was not supported by the parser](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?base64=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. The library tries to resolve the reference at `https:///components/schemas/sentAt` when it should have tried to resolve it from `http://localhost.com/components/schemas/sentAt`. See [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I tried a little test in the [new Studio tool](https://studio.asyncapi.com/) (Studio uses the parser, so it could be used for an easy test), [which showed that this was not supported by the parser](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?base64=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. The library tries to resolve the reference at `https://components/schemas/sentAt` when it should have tried to resolve it from `http://localhost.com/components/schemas/sentAt`. See [parser-js #403](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/403) for more information.
```

## What about `$schema`?
Before getting into `$schema` I first need to mention a keyword in AsyncAPI called [schemaFormat which is part of the Message Object](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.2.0#messageObject). What this keyword is used for is to change what format the payload is defined with. By defining it with `application/vnd.aai.asyncapi+yaml;version=2.2.0` it is the same as the default format.

> In JSON Schema Draft 7, and in the **Schema Object**, there exist a keyword, similar to what `schemaFormat` is for AsyncAPI, that can be used to define what version of JSON Schema `LightMeasurement` follows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In JSON Schema Draft 7, and in the **Schema Object**, there exists a keyword, similar to what `schemaFormat` is for AsyncAPI, that can be used to define what version of JSON Schema `LightMeasurement` follows.
```

> So what if both are defined at the same time, that contradict each other?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So what if both are defined at the same time, and they contradict each other?
```

    LightMeasured:
      payload:
        type: boolean
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/LightMeasurement'
  schemas:
    LightMeasurement:
      type: string
```

The `type` property for the message payload, should be completely ignored. So let's try and see what happens when we try this in [Studio](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?base64=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).

Once the schema is parsed, all that remains is `type: boolean`, and not the expected `type: string` from the referenced schema. This is clearly the opposite of what the specification defines. For more information see [parser-js #404](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/issues/404).

> We then asked ourself, what about JSON Schema, does it define a different behavior? The answer to this question can be found [here](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.3):

Reviewer: Sorry for the nitpick. I think if you meant we in plural...
```suggestion
We then asked ourselves, what about JSON Schema, does it define a different behavior? The answer to this question can be found [here](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-01#section-8.3):
```

> All other properties in a "$ref" object MUST be ignored.

Luckily, they both match the same behavior in terms of extra keywords. Both Reference Object and JSON Schema should ignore extra keywords.

But, what if I use one of the newer JSON Schema versions, what then?

## Upgrading to JSON Schema draft 2020-12
We started to correlate the findings with the feature request from [Maciej](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu) about updating AsyncAPI Schema Object to point towards [JSON Schema Draft 2020-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-bhutton-json-schema-00).

What would this mean for our little `$ref` keywords?

> OpenAPI have in its most recent version 3.1, switched its default JSON Schema version to Draft 2020-12, the exact feature request for AsyncAPI. This, however, introduced a huge change to how you bundle references. I don't want to spend much time on this as [Ben](https://twitter.com/relequestual) and [Mike](https://twitter.com/PermittedSoc) described this entire change and what it means in terms of bundling in this great blog post: https://json-schema.org/blog/posts/bundling-json-schema-compound-documents#bundling-simple-external-resources. Besides this the release notes for Draft 2020-12 also offers some guidance which can be found here: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes.html

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenAPI have in its most recent version 3.1, switched its default JSON Schema version to Draft 2020-12, the exact feature request for AsyncAPI. This, however, introduced a huge change to how you bundle references. I don't want to spend much time on this as [Ben](https://twitter.com/relequestual) and [Mike](https://twitter.com/PermittedSoc) described this entire change and what it means in terms of bundling in this great blog post: https://json-schema.org/blog/posts/bundling-json-schema-compound-documents#bundling-simple-external-resources. Besides this, the release notes for Draft 2020-12 also offers some guidance which can be found here: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/release-notes.html
```

> Besides having a bunch of new keywords that change the referencing behavior, such as `$dynamicRef`, `$dynamicAnchor`, `$anchor`, pne of the key differences is that in [JSON Schema draft 2019-09](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-02), they changed their behavior of references where extra keywords are now allowed adjacent to `$ref`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides having a bunch of new keywords that change the referencing behavior, such as `$dynamicRef`, `$dynamicAnchor`, `$anchor`, one of the key differences is that in [JSON Schema draft 2019-09](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-handrews-json-schema-02), they changed their behavior of references so that extra keywords are now allowed adjacent to `$ref`.
```

But what does this mean exactly? Does this mean `$ref` overwrites any duplicated properties? Or is it the other way around?

> Well, there is one thing we need to remember about JSON Schema. It is primary build for validation rules and how a validator can take input data and determine whether that input is valid against the Schema. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Well, there is one thing we need to remember about JSON Schema. It is primarily built for validation rules and how a validator can take input data and determine whether that input is valid against the Schema. 
```

## Hard to find tooling
This leaves us with one huge deficit, that there are so many different behaviors for references that tooling mix and matches between the specifications and what they solve.

One of the most used tooling for dereferencing stuff in JS, and the one we are using is from [APIDevTools called json-schema-ref-parser](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser). We actually use this tool to ensure **ANY** encounters of `$ref` are dereferenced, so the tool has direct access to the schema, without it having to look elsewhere for it. 

However, the tool started out being built **ONLY** for dereferencing `$ref` based on the [JSON Reference specification and the JSON Pointer specification](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/22#issuecomment-231783185).  At least it was, now it's not easy to figure out what it is for, as [it allows extra properties](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/232) but [$id is not taken into account](https://github.com/APIDevTools/json-schema-ref-parser/issues/136).

> This leaves us in a big of a struggle, as [there are not many alternatives](https://json-schema.org/implementations.html#general-processing), for JS [@hyperjump/json-schema-core](https://github.com/jdesrosiers/json-schema-core) looks promising, but there are no tooling that our [Go parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-go) can use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This leaves us in a bit of a struggle, as [there are not many alternatives](https://json-schema.org/implementations.html#general-processing); JS [@hyperjump/json-schema-core](https://github.com/jdesrosiers/json-schema-core) looks promising, but there's no tooling that our [Go parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-go) can use.
```

> And with no official or community tooling, we are left with having to develop it our selves to adopt the spec... There are luckily efforts being made in [JSON Schema to adopt to such a change](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/113).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And with no official or community tooling, we are left with having to develop it ourselves to adopt the spec... There are luckily efforts being made in [JSON Schema to adopt to such a change](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/113).
```

# Final word

> That concludes the rabbit hole me and Sergio went down, for a simple `$ref` keyword... (ONE KEYWORD! :sweat_smile:)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That concludes the rabbit hole that Sergio and I went down, for a simple `$ref` keyword... (ONE KEYWORD! :sweat_smile:)
```

> All I can add here, in the end, is a serious :pray: that we start switching the mindset from tooling for specification is something others build, to something we all have to build together. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the end, all I can add is a serious prayer :pray: to change the old mindset that building spec tooling is a problem for someone else. The reality is that we should be building these tools together. 
```

Author: `... to change the old mindset that building spec tooling is a problem for someone else` sounds a bit weird 🧐

Reviewer 2: no worries, what sounds weird to you? :)  what sounds confusing?

Reviewer 2: Do you like this more? 
`...to change the old mindset that spec tooling should be built by someone else.`

Author: `spec tooling` particular sounds weird, and that combined with the last end of the sentence 🤔

Reviewer 2: Ok, replace the phrase "spec tooling" with what you think is the correct one :) 

And I also suggested another way to phrase this, and hopefully, that one is better and/or you like it more. I just **do** think we need to improve the original one :D

Author: After some thought, I feel like this sentence is a bit too aggressive in some ways 😄 Gonna remove it.

```suggestion
```
